# TheoLab (white paper)

**Given** that research in the Digital Humanities best succeeds with the support of and in cooperation with distinguished scholars, the project is geared toward transdisciplinary collaboration, strong public communication, overarching issues, and agile methods of working. Collaborating across four main research areas, _TheoLab_ will address the following questions:

* How does digital culture change academic reflection?
* How does this shift affect academic culture?
* How does academic theology change in digital spaces?

Applying computational methods to research problems in the humanities has been an integral part of the research landscape for several years. However, the emerging centres for Digital Humanities show a common theme: They mostly engage DH from a specific disciplinary perspective, so that no coherent picture of the DH landscape can be drawn. The various university chairs in Digital Humanities are each shaped by the field of the chair holders, e.g. in history, philosophy, literary criticism, philology, or archeology. For the respective departments, this results in an enormous leap of knowledge. Yet the methods of one area cannot simply be transferred to another. That is why, among Digital Humanities researchers, it has long been an ongoing discussion if the Digital Humanities should be understood as an independent discipline or as an auxiliary discipline, characterized by the application of certain computational methods. This debate accompanies all newly emerging DH projects and characterizes the young research community’s still ongoing process of self-definition [see e.g. already Matthew Kirschenbaum, What is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in English Departments?, ADE 150 (2010), 55-61, 55: “’What is Digital Humanities?‘ essays like this one are already genre pieces”].

The fact that theology now wants to participate in this process with several representatives is not merely due to the history of the subject (the Italian Jesuit Roberto Busa’s data base project — the Index Thomisticus — which arose out of a collaboration between Busa and the IBM founder Thomas Watson, qualifies as origin of the Digital Humanities, after all), but rather based on its research method, through which theology fills a genuine desideratum in the Digital Humanities:

## Theological research is multi-methodological research

Theological questions never clearly match a specific branch of research. During their studies, theologians therefore learn research methods from almost all text-based disciplines and also gain experience beyond the text, for instance in archeology, history of art, or psychology (pastoral care). At the same time they learn strong transfer and communication skills, required for translating academic research into vocational practice. Theological research is thus defined not only by a religiously and ecclesiastically shaped research object, but also by the justified combination of philological, literary, historical, cultural, social scientific, empirical, and philosophical approaches.

_TheoLab_ therefore sees itself as a research network that connects with potential cooperation partners based on subject-specific questions, combining and deepening the method-integrative approach of theological research with the expertise from related disciplines in the humanities.

We aim to conduct theological research using digital methods for a disciplinary production of knowledge, while simultaneously contributing to the development of digital methods in transdisciplinary perspective. This can only succeed when disciplinary digital research is incorporated into one’s own work and when the useful combination of research methods is reflected and justified. To this end, a scientific reflection of our approach is necessary. After all, when textual interpretations are prepared by “tools” and no longer solely subject to one’s own creativity, this directly impacts the process of knowledge formation. Among representatives of digital humanities, this reflection __on__ the application of digital research methods is one essential component of the processes of theory formation. Through participation in the newly forming DHd-AG “Theorie Digital Humanities”, _TheoLab_ will help shape this component actively.

A strong reflection __on__ the consequences of digital transformation can also be observed within recent church discourse. A variety of theological literature already addresses the ethical, anthropological, and societal consequences of digital transformation, and consolidates initiatives and research that take the phenomenon of “digitalization” into account with the terms “digital church” and “digital theology.” In this context, _TheoLab_ consciously takes the opposite position:

## Digital theology is research __with__ digital methods

For _TheoLab_, the term “digital theology” refers to the participation in the digital humanities discourse and the contribution to research __with__ computerized methods. This approach has an experimental and exploratory character, as there is hardly any theological research which goes beyond the application of single methods (e.g. corpus linguistics, social network analysis, database creation, etc.).

_TheoLab_ therefore sees itself as a network of researchers who use digital humanities methods in their own projects and experiment with their project-specific corpora.

The already mentioned method-integrative dimension of the project leads to the challenge that, in order to add something substantially new to the discourse, the research projects of _TheoLab_ have to be located at levels DH 3.0 and DH 4.0 of the DH model proposed by the Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing [see the blog entry „Discipline or a Collection of Methods? DH Are Both and Neither!,” INFODITEX-BLOG, 2019-04-15,  [https://infoditex.hypotheses.org/1222](https://infoditex.hypotheses.org/1222), for more information about this model]. In the current discourse, research projects in the humanities that meet these requirements are increasingly referred to as “Computational Humanities.” This term essentially distinguishes between researchers who obtained their results through a mere application of tools and those who also developed independent and standalone methods. But since this skill is rare in the humanities — even within Digital Humanities, this requirement leads to the serious problem that research questions are adapted to the available tools rather than vice versa. Although we classify the projects of _TheoLab_ as belonging to the realm of the _Computational Humanities_, the participating theologians themselves are unable to implement the computer scientific portions to the necessary extent. Computer scientific problem solving strategies, programming languages, or computational linguistic analyses are not part of a humanities degree, and hence their qualification is insufficient for independent computational work. Tool application and reflection alone, however, do (in our view) not justify establishing a new branch of research. We therefore define the term “digital theology” by the clearly stated research requirement that projects under this umbrella must bear method development and transdisciplinary application in mind. This succeeds on the following further premise:

## Computational research is research geared to cooperation and  transfer
The previously stated observation that most research in the digital humanities is specific to each discipline challenges _TheoLab_ to integrate tools and methods in its own research and combine them in such a way that guarantees further, or even new, developments. In order to achieve this, _TheoLab_ relies on collaboration with the computer sciences, based on the principle that method and tool development occurs among equal research partners, enabling an essential research contribution for both sides. At the same time, the multi-methodological and method-integrative approach makes obvious the necessity for knowledge transfer. If theology is understood as a discipline that combines cross-disciplinary methods and develops computational methods and tools based on this, then the technical results of the _TheoLab_ will have a transdisciplinary effect on research in all the humanities.

_TheoLab_ therefore sees itself as an actor in the field of method, tool, and software development, which supplies tools for multidisciplinary and method-integrative work for end users and researchers.

Aiming to _reflect_, _experiment_ with, and actively _shape_ digital methods, TheoLab is guided by the following principles:

* Pluralism of methods and method development: _TheoLab_ does not just compile individual projects, but has its own overarching project objective, which all research areas work towards (method transfer to other subjects, sustainable tool development, overarching epistemological questions, etc.).
* Collaboration: At _TheoLab_, computer scientists are not auxiliary “service providers,” but equal research partners.
* Cooperation: _TheoLab_ cooperates with institutions with similarly oriented, text-based DH initiatives to reflect on disciplinary research methods and to integrate them into its research areas.
* Communication and transfer: TheoLab has a transparent public relations strategy — including social media accounts, blogging, conference organization, workshops, and think tanks — in order to ensure the sustainability and transdisciplinary application of  the developed methods and tools.
